
The Holy Bible
Part 1 out of 74
FullBooks.com homepage
Index of The Holy Bible
Next part (2)


assisted Mr. Book and transcribed selections from the first editions
included as appendices.




HISTORY


This e-text comes from multiple editions of Challoner's revised Douay-
Rheims Version of the Holy Bible. In 1568 English exiles, many from
Oxford, established the English College of Douay (Douai/Doway), Flanders,
under William (later Cardinal) Allen. In October, 1578, Gregory Martin
began the work of preparing an English translation of the Bible for
Catholic readers, the first such translation into Modern English.
Assisting were William Allen, Richard Bristow, Thomas Worthington, and
William Reynolds who revised, criticized, and corrected Dr. Martin's
work. The college published the New Testament at Rheims (Reims/Rhemes),
France, in 1582 through John Fogny with a preface and explanatory notes,
authored chiefly by Bristol, Allen, and Worthington. Later the Old
Testament was published at Douay in two parts (1609 and 1610) by Laurence
Kellam through the efforts of Dr. Worthington, then superior of the
seminary. The translation had been prepared before the appearance of the
New Testament, but the publication was delayed due to financial
difficulties. The religious and scholarly adherence to the Latin Vulgate
text led to the less elegant and idiomatic words and phrases often found
in the translation. In some instances where no English word conveyed the
full meaning of the Latin, a Latin word was Anglicized and its meaning
defined in a glossary. Although ridiculed by critics, many of these
words later found common usage in the English language. Spellings of
proper names and the numbering of the Psalms are adopted from the Latin
Vulgate.

In 1749 Dr. Richard Challoner began a major revision of the Douay and
Rheims texts, the spellings and phrasing of which had become increasingly
archaic in the almost two centuries since the translations were first
produced. He modernized the diction and introduced a more fluid style,
while faithfully maintaining the accuracy of Dr. Martin's texts. This
revision became the 'de facto' standard text for English speaking
Catholics until the twentieth century. It is still highly regarded by
many for its style, although it is now rarely used for liturgical
purposes. The notes included in this electronic edition are generally
attributed to Bishop Challoner.

The 1610 printing of the second tome of the Old Testament includes an
appendix containing the non-canonical books 'Prayer of Manasses,' 'Third
Booke of Esdras,' and 'Fourth Booke of Esdras.' While not part of
Challoner's revision, the 1610 texts are placed in the appendices of
this e-text. Also included are the original texts of two short books,
'The Prophecie of Abdias' and 'The Catholike Epistle of Iude the
Apostle,' to give the reader a sense of the language of the first
editions in comparison to the Challoner revision. Further background on
the Douay-Rheims version may be found in a selection from the preface to
the 1582 edition and the original glossary included in the appendices.




CONTENTS


The Old Testament

Book of Genesis
Book of Exodus
Book of Leviticus
Book of Numbers
Book of Deuteronomy
Book of Josue
Book of Judges
Book of Ruth
First Book of Samuel, alias 1 Kings
Second Book of Samuel, alias 2 Kings
Third Book of Kings
Fourth Book of Kings
First Book of Paralipomenon
Second Book of Paralipomenon
First Book of Esdras
Book of Nehemias, alias 2 Esdras
Book of Tobias
Book of Judith
Book of Esther
Book of Job
Book of Psalms
Book of Proverbs
Ecclesiastes
Solomon's Canticle of Canticles
Book of Wisdom
Ecclesiasticus
Prophecy of Isaias
Prophecy of Jeremias
Lamentations of Jeremias
Prophecy of Baruch
Prophecy of Ezechiel
Prophecy of Daniel
Prophecy of Osee
Prophecy of Joel
Prophecy of Amos
Prophecy of Abdias
Prophecy of Jonas
Prophecy of Micheas
Prophecy of Nahum
Prophecy of Habacuc
Prophecy of Sophonias
Prophecy of Aggeus
Prophecy of Zacharias
Prophecy of Malachias
First Book of Machabees
Second Book of Machabees


The New Testament

Gospel According to St. Matthew
Gospel According to St. Mark
Gospel According to St. Luke
Gospel According to St. John
Acts of the Apostles
Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans
First Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians
Second Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians
Epistle of St. Paul to the Galatians
Epistle of St. Paul to the Ephesians
Epistle of St. Paul to the Philippians
Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians
First Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians
Second Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians
First Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy
Second Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy
Epistle of St. Paul to Titus
Epistle of St. Paul to Philemon
Epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrews
Catholic Epistle of St. James the Apostle
First Epistle of St. Peter the Apostle
Second Epistle of St. Peter the Apostle
First Epistle of St. John the Apostle
Second Epistle of St. John the Apostle
Third Epistle of St. John the Apostle
Catholic Epistle of St. Jude the Apostle
Apocalypse of St. John the Apostle


Appendices

The Prayer of Manasses
The Third Booke of Esdras
The Fourth Booke of Esdras

The Prophecie of Abdias
The Catholike Epistle of Iude the Apostle

The Preface to the Reader
Hard Vvordes Explicated





THE OLD TESTAMENT





THE BOOK OF GENESIS



This book is so called from its treating of the GENERATION, that is, of
the creation and the beginning of the world. The Hebrews call it
BERESITH, from the Word with which it begins. It contains not only the
history of the Creation of the world; but also an account of its
progress during the space of 2369 years, that is, until the death of
JOSEPH.



Genesis Chapter 1


God createth Heaven and Earth, and all things therein, in six days.

1:1. In the beginning God created heaven, and earth.

1:2. And the earth was void and empty, and darkness was upon the face
of the deep; and the spirit of God moved over the waters.

1:3. And God said: Be light made. And light was made.

1:4. And God saw the light that it was good; and he divided the light
from the darkness.

1:5. And he called the light Day, and the darkness Night; and there was
evening and morning one day.

1:6. And God said: Let there be a firmament made amidst the waters: and
let it divide the waters from the waters.

A firmament. . .By this name is here understood the whole space between
the earth, and the highest stars. The lower part of which divideth the
waters that are upon the earth, from those that are above in the
clouds.

1:7. And God made a firmament, and divided the waters that were under
the firmament, from those that were above the firmament, and it was so.

1:8. And God called the firmament, Heaven; and the evening and morning
were the second day.

1:9. God also said; Let the waters that are under the heaven, be
gathered together into one place: and let the dry land appear. And it
was so done.

1:10. And God called the dry land, Earth; and the gathering together of
the waters, he called Seas. And God saw that it was good.

1:11. And he said: let the earth bring forth green herb, and such as
may seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after its kind, which may
have seed in itself upon the earth. And it was so done.

1:12. And the earth brought forth the green herb, and such as yieldeth
seed according to its kind, and the tree that beareth fruit, having
seed each one according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.

1:13. And the evening and the morning were the third day.

1:14. And God said: Let there be lights made in the firmament of
heaven, to divide the day and the night, and let them be for signs, and
for seasons, and for days and years:

1:15. To shine in the firmament of heaven, and to give light upon the
earth, and it was so done.

1:16. And God made two great lights: a greater light to rule the day;
and a lesser light to rule the night: and the stars.

Two great lights. . .God created on the first day, light, which being
moved from east to west, by its rising and setting, made morning and
evening. But on the fourth day he ordered and distributed this light,
and made the sun, moon, and stars. The moon, though much less than the
stars, is here called a great light, from its giving a far greater
light to the earth than any of them.

1:17. And he set them in the firmament of heaven to shine upon the
earth.

1:18. And to rule the day and the night, and to divide the light and
the darkness. And God saw that it was good.

1:19. And the evening and morning were the fourth day.

1:20. God also said: let the waters bring forth the creeping creature
having life, and the fowl that may fly over the earth under the
firmament of heaven.

1:21. And God created the great whales, and every living and moving
creature, which the waters brought forth, according to their kinds, and
every winged fowl according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.

1:22. And he blessed them, saying: Increase and multiply, and fill the
waters of the sea: and let the birds be multiplied upon the earth.

1:23. And the evening and morning were the fifth day.

1:24. And God said: Let the earth bring forth the living creature in
its kind, cattle and creeping things, and beasts of the earth,
according to their kinds. And it was so done.

1:25. And God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds,
and cattle, and every thing that creepeth on the earth after its kind.
And God saw that it was good.

1:26. And he said: Let us make man to our image and likeness: and let
him have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air,
and the beasts, and the whole earth, and every creeping creature that
moveth upon the earth.

Let us make man to our image. . .This image of God in man, is not in the
body, but in the soul; which is a spiritual substance, endued with
understanding and free will. God speaketh here in the plural number, to
insinuate the plurality of persons in the Deity.

1:27. And God created man to his own image: to the image of God he
created him: male and female he created them.

1:28. And God blessed them, saying: Increase and multiply, and fill the
earth, and subdue it, and rule over the fishes of the sea, and the
fowls of the air, and all living creatures that move upon the earth.

Increase and multiply. . .This is not a precept, as some Protestant
controvertists would have it, but a blessing, rendering them fruitful;
for God had said the same words to the fishes, and birds, (ver. 22) who
were incapable of receiving a precept.

1:29. And God said: Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed
upon the earth, and all trees that have in themselves seed of their own
kind, to be your meat:

1:30. And to all beasts of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and
to all that move upon the earth, and wherein there is life, that they
may have to feed upon. And it was so done.

1:31. And God saw all the things that he had made, and they were very
good. And the evening and morning were the sixth day.



Genesis Chapter 2


God resteth on the seventh day and blesseth it. The earthly paradise,
in which God placeth man. He commandeth him not to eat of the tree of
knowledge. And formeth a woman of his rib.

2:1. So the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the furniture
of them.

2:2. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made: and
he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had done.

He rested, etc. . .That is, he ceased to make or create any new kinds of
things. Though, as our Lord tells us, John 5.17, "He still worketh",
viz., by conserving and governing all things, and creating souls.

2:3. And he blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because in it
he had rested from all his work which God created and made.

2:4. These are the generations of the heaven and the earth, when they
were created, in the day that the Lord God made the heaven and the
earth:

2:5. And every plant of the field before it sprung up in the earth, and
every herb of the ground before it grew: for the Lord God had not
rained upon the earth; and there was not a man to till the earth.

2:6. But a spring rose out of the earth, watering all the surface of
the earth.

2:7. And the Lord God formed man of the slime of the earth: and
breathed into his face the breath of life, and man became a living
soul.

2:8. And the Lord God had planted a paradise of pleasure from the
beginning: wherein he placed man whom he had formed.

2:9. And the Lord God brought forth of the ground all manner of trees,
fair to behold, and pleasant to eat of: the tree of life also in the
midst of paradise: and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

The tree of life. . .So called because it had that quality, that by
eating of the fruit of it, man would have been preserved in a constant
state of health, vigour, and strength, and would not have died at all.
The tree of knowledge. . .To which the deceitful serpent falsely
attributed the power of imparting a superior kind of knowledge, beyond
that which God was pleased to give.

2:10. And a river went out of the place of pleasure to water paradise,
which from thence is divided into four heads.

2:11. The name of the one is Phison: that is it which compasseth all
the land of Hevilath, where gold groweth.

2:12. And the gold of that land is very good: there is found bdellium,
and the onyx stone.

2:13. And the name of the second river is Gehon: the same is it that
compasseth all the land of Ethiopia.

2:14. And the name of the third river is Tigris: the same passeth along
by the Assyrians. And the fourth river is Euphrates.

2:15. And the Lord God took man, and put him into the paradise of
pleasure, to dress it, and to keep it.

2:16. And he commanded him, saying: Of every tree of paradise thou
shalt eat:

2:17. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not
eat. For in what day soever thou shalt eat of it, thou shalt die the
death.

2:18. And the Lord God said: It is not good for man to be alone: let us
make him a help like unto himself.

2:19. And the Lord God having formed out of the ground all the beasts
of the earth, and all the fowls of the air, brought them to Adam to see
what he would call them: for whatsoever Adam called any living creature
the same is its name.

2:20. And Adam called all the beasts by their names, and all the fowls
of the air, and all the cattle of the field: but for Adam there was not
found a helper like himself.

2:21. Then the Lord God cast a deep sleep upon Adam: and when he was
fast asleep, he took one of his ribs, and filled up flesh for it.

2:22. And the Lord God built the rib which he took from Adam into a
woman: and brought her to Adam.

2:23. And Adam said: This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh; she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man.

2:24. Wherefore a man shall leave father and mother, and shall cleave
to his wife: and they shall be two in one flesh.

2:25. And they were both naked: to wit, Adam and his wife: and were not
ashamed.



Genesis Chapter 3


The serpent's craft. The fall of our first parents. Their punishment.
The promise of a Redeemer.

3:1. Now the serpent was more subtle than any of the beasts of the
earth which the Lord God had made. And he said to the woman: Why hath
God commanded you, that you should not eat of every tree of paradise?

3:2. And the woman answered him, saying: Of the fruit of the trees that
are in paradise we do eat:

3:3. But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of paradise,
God hath commanded us that we should not eat; and that we should not
touch it, lest perhaps we die.

3:4. And the serpent said to the woman: No, you shall not die the
death.

3:5. For God doth know that in what day soever you shall eat thereof,
your eyes shall be opened: and you shall be as Gods, knowing good and
evil.

3:6. And the woman saw that the tree was good to eat, and fair to the
eyes, and delightful to behold: and she took of the fruit thereof, and
did eat, and gave to her husband, who did eat.

3:7. And the eyes of them both were opened: and when they perceived
themselves to be naked, they sewed together fig leaves, and made
themselves aprons.

And the eyes, etc. . .Not that they were blind before, (for the woman
saw that the tree was fair to the eyes, ver. 6.) nor yet that their
eyes were opened to any more perfect knowledge of good; but only to the
unhappy experience of having lost the good of original grace and
innocence, and incurred the dreadful evil of sin. From whence followed
a shame of their being naked; which they minded not before; because
being now stript of original grace, they quickly began to be subject to
the shameful rebellions of the flesh.

3:8. And when they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in paradise
at the afternoon air, Adam and his wife hid themselves from the face of
the Lord God, amidst the trees of paradise.

3:9. And the Lord God called Adam, and said to him: Where art thou?

3:10. And he said: I heard thy voice in paradise; and I was afraid,
because I was naked, and I hid myself.

3:11. And he said to him: And who hath told thee that thou wast naked,
but that thou hast eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou
shouldst not eat?

3:12. And Adam said: The woman, whom thou gavest me to be my companion,
gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

3:13. And the Lord God said to the woman: Why hast thou done this? And
she answered: The serpent deceived me, and I did eat.
